content/examples: add Flatcar Container Linux provisioning page (#28)
tinkerbell/tinkerbell.org: content/examples/flatcar-container-linux/_index.md

+++
title = "Flatcar Container Linux"
date = 2020-05-11T06:50:00+00:00
draft = false
weight = 10
toc = true

+++

This document describes the process of provisioning Flatcar Container Linux machines using Tinkerbell.

## Preparing flatcar-install Docker image

To install [Flatcar Container Linux](https://www.flatcar-linux.org/) as the target OS on the worker, the Docker image from the following `Dockerfile` needs to be pushed into the Tinkerbell registry:

```
FROM ubuntu

RUN apt update && apt install -y udev gpg wget

RUN wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/flatcar-linux/init/flatcar-master/bin/flatcar-install -O /usr/local/bin/flatcar-install && \
    chmod +x /usr/local/bin/flatcar-install
```

> Before you build the image, make sure you have `TINKERBELL_HOST_IP` environment variable set, pointing to the Tinkerbell server IP address. This can usually be done by sourcing `envrc`file, generated by Tinkerbell's `setup.sh` script. To load the environment variables from this file, run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you build the image, make sure you have `TINKERBELL_HOST_IP` environment variable set, pointing to the Tinkerbell server IP address. This can usually be done by sourcing `envrc` file, generated by Tinkerbell's `setup.sh` script. To load the environment variables from this file, run the following command:
```

```sh
source envrc
```

You should build the image using the following command:

```shell
docker build -t $TINKERBELL_HOST_IP/flatcar-install .
```

Then, you should push the image to Tinkerbell registry, so it can be pulled by workers during workflow execution:

```shell
docker push $TINKERBELL_HOST_IP/flatcar-install
```

## Preparing Flatcar Container Linux images

For the installation, worker requires access to the Flatcar Container Linux images. Those can be accessed in 2 different ways:

### Use official mirrors

If your workers have internet access, workers should be able to pull the Flatcar images from the official mirror. Please note,
that this method will be slower than setting up local mirror for the images.

> If you don't have dedicated NAT gateway, which you can use for workers, you can make a Tinkerbell server to act as one using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't have dedicated NAT gateway, which you can use for workers, you can make a Tinkerbell provisioner to act as one using
```

the following command:

```shell
sudo iptables -t nat -A POSTROUTING -o enp0s3 -j MASQUERADE
sudo iptables -A FORWARD -i enp0s3 -j ACCEPT
```

Where `enp0s3` is the interface name used for Tinkerbell.

> Once done, please make sure your workers have `gateway` field configured in their hardware entries. `gateway` field should
> point to Tinkerbell server IP address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once done, please make sure your workers have `gateway` field configured in their hardware entries pointing to the Tinkerbell server IP address.
```

Example snippet of hardware entry with `gateway` defined:
```json

> "ip_addresses": [{"address": "192.168.50.10", "gateway": "192.168.50.2", "netmask": "255.255.255.0", "address_family": 4}]

Reviewer: To make it more readable.

```suggestion
...
   "ip_addresses" : [
      {
         "address" : "192.168.50.10",
         "address_family" : 4,
         "gateway" : "192.168.50.2",
         "netmask" : "255.255.255.0"
      }
   ]
...
```

```

### Use local mirror

If your workers do not have internet access or if you want to speed up the provisioning process,

> you can set up local Flatcar mirror, from where the Flatcar images will be pulled by workers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you can set up a local Flatcar mirror, from where the Flatcar images will be pulled by workers.
```

The images will be served by nginx running as part of Tinkerbell stack.

> The mirror can be created and updated using official script, which you can find on [GitHub](https://github.com/kinvolk/flatcar-release-mirror).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The mirror can be created and updated using the [official script](https://github.com/kinvolk/flatcar-release-mirror).
```

#### Creating mirror

To prepare the directories for the mirror and download the mirroring script, run the following command:

```sh
mkdir /var/tinkerbell/nginx/misc/flatcar
cd /var/tinkerbell/nginx/misc/flatcar
wget https://github.com/kinvolk/flatcar-release-mirror/raw/master/flatcar-release-mirror.sh && chmod +x flatcar-release-mirror.sh
```

Then, run the mirror script:
```shell
./flatcar-release-mirror.sh --only-files 'flatcar_production_image\|version' --above-version 2344 --logfile /dev/stderr --channels stable
```

> It will download all Flatcar images above version 2344 only from stable channel. This should require downloading around 1.1 GB of data.

Reviewer: It will grow over time

```suggestion
It will download all Flatcar images above version 2344 only from stable channel. This currently requires downloading around 1.1 GB of data.
```

> If you want to download only the latest version, you can check Flatcar releases [here](https://www.flatcar-linux.org/releases/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to download only the latest version, you can check the Flatcar releases [here](https://www.flatcar-linux.org/releases/).
```

> Please note, that downloading only specific channel/versions may limit the usage of `--channel` and `--version`
> parameters in `flatcar-install` script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note, that downloading only specific channel/versions may limit the usage of the `--channel` and `--version`
parameters in `flatcar-install`.
```

#### Using local mirror in the template

> To use local mirror in the template, add the following arguments to the `flatcar-install` script in `flatcar-install` task described in the next step:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use local mirror in the template, add the following arguments to the `flatcar-install` script in the `flatcar-install` task described in the next step:
```

```yaml
- -b
- http://192.168.50.3/misc/flatcar/stable/amd64-usr
```

> Where `192.168.50.3` is the 2nd IP address used by Tinkerbell.

Reviewer: What does this mean and how can users get it?

Author: Added, please take a look, as I'm not sure about the wording.

## Preparing template

> Here is the content of example template, which can be used as a base for the next steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example template, which can be used as a base for the next steps.
```

```yaml
version: '0.1'
name: flatcar-install
global_timeout: 1800
tasks:
- name: "flatcar-install"
  worker: "{{.machine1}}"
  volumes:
  - /dev:/dev
  - /statedir:/statedir
  actions:
  - name: "dump-ignition"
    image: flatcar-install
    command:
    - sh
    - -c
    - echo 'eyJpZ25pdGlvbiI6eyJjb25maWciOnt9LCJzZWN1cml0eSI6eyJ0bHMiOnt9fSwidGltZW91dHMiOnt9LCJ2ZXJzaW9uIjoiMi4yLjAifSwibmV0d29ya2QiOnt9LCJwYXNzd2QiOnt9LCJzdG9yYWdlIjp7fSwic3lzdGVtZCI6e319' | base64 -d > /statedir/ignition.json
  - name: "flatcar-install"
    image: flatcar-install
    command:
    - /usr/local/bin/flatcar-install
    - -s
    - -i
    - /statedir/ignition.json
```

### Ignition configurations

> Recommended way of configuring Flatcar is via Ignition file during installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The recommended way of configuring Flatcar is via an Ignition file during installation.
```

> Example template supports providing Ignition configuration in a form of Base64 encoded string injected directly into the template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example template supports providing Ignition configuration in form of a Base64 encoded string injected directly into the template.
```

See [Flatcar documentation about provisioning](https://docs.flatcar-linux.org/os/provisioning/) for more details.

> To create sample configuration, create `config.yaml` file with the following content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a sample configuration, create a file named `config.yaml` with the following content:
```

```yaml
passwd:
  users:
  - name: core
    ssh_authorized_keys:
    - YOUR_SSH_KEY
```

Then, use the following command to validate and encode your configuration:

```shell

> ct -in-file config.yaml  | base64 -w0; echo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ct -in-file config.yaml | base64 -w0; echo
```

```

> Returned string can be then put in the template, by replacing default `eyJpZ25pdGlvbiI6eyJjb25maWciOnt9LCJzZWN1cml0eSI6eyJ0bHMiOnt9fSwidGltZW91dHMiOnt9LCJ2ZXJzaW9uIjoiMi4yLjAifSwibmV0d29ya2QiOnt9LCJwYXNzd2QiOnt9LCJzdG9yYWdlIjp7fSwic3lzdGVtZCI6e319` Ignition configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The returned string can be then put in the template, replacing the default `eyJpZ25pdGlvbiI6eyJjb25maWciOnt9LCJzZWN1cml0eSI6eyJ0bHMiOnt9fSwidGltZW91dHMiOnt9LCJ2ZXJzaW9uIjoiMi4yLjAifSwibmV0d29ya2QiOnt9LCJwYXNzd2QiOnt9LCJzdG9yYWdlIjp7fSwic3lzdGVtZCI6e319` Ignition configuration.
```

### Target disk

> By default the template installs Flatcar to smallest disk found on the worker using `-s` flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default the template installs Flatcar to the smallest disk found on the worker using the `-s` flag.
```

### Extra installation parameters

See [Flatcar documentation](https://docs.flatcar-linux.org/os/installing-to-disk/) to see all available parameters.

### Creating

After modifying the example template, you need to create it in Tinkerbell using the following command:

```shell
tink template create -n flatcar-install -p /tmp/flatcar-install.tmpl
```

Please keep the `ID` of created template, as it will be used in next steps.

## Creating workflow

After creating the template, you need to create the workflow object. This can be done using the following command:

```shell
tink workflow create -t TEMPLATE_ID -r '{"machine1": "02:42:db:98:4b:1e"}'
```

> This command will return you workflow ID, which is needed to check the status of the workflow. Template ID will no longer be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command will return the workflow ID, which is needed to check the status of the workflow. Template ID will no longer be used.
```

## Provisioning

> With workflow created, you can boot/reboot your worker(s), so it picks up the new workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the workflow created, you can boot/reboot your worker(s), so it picks up the new workflow.
```

> You can track the progress of workflow execution using the following commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can track progress of the workflow execution using the following commands:
```

```shell
tink workflow state WORKFLOW_ID
tink workflow events WORKFLOW_ID
```

> Once the workflow is finished, you can reboot the worker and it should now boot Flatcar Container Linux from disk.

Reviewer: On Packet this is not true, for example, so maybe something like

```suggestion
Once the workflow is finished you can reboot the worker and, after configuring the worker to boot from disk, it should now boot Flatcar Container Linux.
```

Author: Sounds good, thanks!

Please note, that downloading only specific channel/versions may limit the usage of the `--channel` and `--version`
parameters in `flatcar-install`.

#### Using local mirror in the template

To use local mirror in the template, add the following arguments to the `flatcar-install` script in the `flatcar-install` task described in the next step:

```yaml
- -b
- http://192.168.50.3/misc/flatcar/stable/amd64-usr
```

Where `192.168.50.3` is the Tinkerbell nginx IP address, which can be obtained from
`envrc` file generated by `setup.sh` script, as `TINKERBELL_NGINX_IP` variable, for example
by running the following command (if you previously run `source envrc`):

```sh
echo $TINKERBELL_NGINX_IP
```

## Preparing template

Here is an example template, which can be used as a base for the next steps.

```yaml
version: "0.1"
name: flatcar-install
global_timeout: 1800
tasks:
  - name: "flatcar-install"
    worker: "{{.machine1}}"
    volumes:
      - /dev:/dev
      - /statedir:/statedir
    actions:
      - name: "dump-ignition"
        image: flatcar-install
        command:
          - sh
          - -c

>           - echo 'eyJpZ25pdGlvbiI6eyJjb25maWciOnt9LCJzZWN1cml0eSI6eyJ0bHMiOnt9fSwidGltZW91dHMiOnt9LCJ2ZXJzaW9uIjoiMi4yLjAifSwibmV0d29ya2QiOnt9LCJwYXNzd2QiOnt9LCJzdG9yYWdlIjp7fSwic3lzdGVtZCI6e319' | base64 -d > /statedir/ignition.json

Reviewer 2: isn't there a way to push this somewhere else? its really odd to have instance specific data here. shouldn't this be done when we are using `workflow create` instead (using e.g. `{{.ignition}}` here)?

Author: I know this is not the ideal place to put it, but from my understanding of Tinkerbell architecture, this is the best place to put it. Or is is now maybe allowed to add arbitrary data while creating the workflows?

Reviewer 2: You can add data when creating the workflow; like the {{.machine1}} that is in line 136.

Author: >You can add data when creating the workflow; like the {{.machine1}} that is in line 136.

I just tested it and indeed it seems to work, thanks! Previously, when there was still `target` around, this was not possible. I'll update the guide.

>Maybe we can also push this to the metadata service as some kind of secret?

I don't know how this could be done. Could you elaborate your idea please?
